Java Networking

A networking is a system of computer connected together, so they can share resources and communicate with one another.
It refers to how the connected computers communicate.

In the Java scope
The "java.net" package contains classes for establishing connections between computers and then send messages between
them.

Ports are used to rout data to the correct application.

IP stands for Internet Protocol. You may have heard the term TCP/IP. This refers
to using the TCP protocol with IP addresses, which doesn't necessarily mean the
host is connected to the Internet. Two applications running on the same host
can use TCP/IP to communicate with each other. When the client and server are
on the same host, usually the IP address 127.0.0.1, which is referred to as
localhost, is used to identify the host.

java.net package
It has two APIs, the low-level (most advanced) and the high-level.
When working with networking you'll be working with abstractions.

Client/Server connection
TCP, which stands for Transmission Control Protocol, establishes a two-way connection between hosts,
and this connection is reliable in the sense that the two hosts talk to each other.
When used with Internet addresses, you get TCP/IP, which uses the client/server model.

When communicating using TCP/IP, the sequence of events is as follows:
1. The client opens a connection to the server
2. The client sends a request to the server
3. The server sends a response to the client

When using the low-level networking API, you'll use sockets to establish
connections, send requests, and receive responses. A socket is one end-point of
the two-way connection. The client will have a socket, and the server will have a
socket.

When you have multiple clients connecting to the same server, they'll use the
same port number, but each client will have its own socket. You'll use the Socket
class for the client socket, and the ServerSocket class for the server's socket.


When using Java all you have to do is to provide the IP address and port when you create a socket.
Underneath the covers, specific messages have to be sent to establish a
connection between the client and the server (a process that's called
handshaking), and the data has to be sent as packets, which must be in a
specific format.
